# Relational Databases

Relational databases are probably the best-known database variant, because of the success of companies like Oracle. Relational databases are based on the mathematical field of set theory. The term "relation" is really just a synonym for "set" -- a relation is just a set of records or, in our terminology, a table. One of the main innovations in early relational systems was to insulate the programmer from the physical organization of the database. Rather than walking through arrays of records or traversing pointers, programmers make statements about tables in a high-level language, and the system executes those statements.

Relational databases operate on tuples, or records, composed of values of several different data types, including integers, character strings, and others. Operations include searching for records whose values satisfy some criteria, updating records, and so on.

Virtually all relational databases use the Structured Query Language, or SQL. This language permits people and computer programs to work with the database by writing simple statements. The database engine reads those statements and determines how to satisfy them on the tables in the database.

SQL is the main practical advantage of relational database systems. Rather than writing a computer program to find records of interest, the relational system user can just type a query in a simple syntax, and let the engine do the work. This gives users enormous flexibility; they do not need to decide in advance what kind of searches they want to do, and they do not need expensive programmers to find the data they need. Learning SQL requires some effort, but it's much simpler than a full-blown high-level programming language for most purposes. And there are a lot of programmers who have already learned SQL.