# What is Berkeley DB?

So far, we have discussed database systems in general terms. It is time now to consider Berkeley DB in particular and see how it fits into the framework we have introduced. The key question is, what kinds of applications should use Berkeley DB?

Berkeley DB is an Open Source embedded database library that provides scalable, high-performance, transaction-protected data management services to applications. Berkeley DB provides a simple function-call API for data access and management.

By "Open Source," we mean Berkeley DB is distributed under a license that conforms to the Open Source Definition. This license guarantees Berkeley DB is freely available for use and redistribution in other Open Source applications. Oracle Corporation sells commercial licenses allowing the redistribution of Berkeley DB in proprietary applications. In all cases the complete source code for Berkeley DB is freely available for download and use.

Berkeley DB is "embedded" because it links directly into the application. It runs in the same address space as the application. As a result, no inter-process communication, either over the network or between processes on the same machine, is required for database operations. Berkeley DB provides a simple function-call API for a number of programming languages, including C, C++, Java, Perl, Tcl, Python, and PHP. All database operations happen inside the library. Multiple processes, or multiple threads in a single process, can all use the database at the same time as each uses the Berkeley DB library. Low-level services like locking, transaction logging, shared buffer management, memory management, and so on are all handled transparently by the library.

The Berkeley DB library is extremely portable. It runs under almost all UNIX and Linux variants, Windows, and a number of embedded real-time operating systems. It runs on both 32-bit and 64-bit systems. It has been deployed on high-end Internet servers, desktop machines, and on palmtop computers, set-top boxes, in network switches, and elsewhere. Once Berkeley DB is linked into the application, the end user generally does not know that there is a database present at all.

Berkeley DB is scalable in a number of respects. The database library itself is quite compact (under 300 kilobytes of text space on common architectures), which means it is small enough to run in tightly constrained embedded systems, but yet it can take advantage of gigabytes of memory and terabytes of disk if you are using hardware that has those resources.

Each of Berkeley DB's database files can contain up to 256 terabytes of data, assuming the underlying filesystem is capable of supporting files of that size. Note that Berkeley DB applications often use multiple database files. This means that the amount of data your Berkeley DB application can manage is really limited only by the constraints imposed by your operating system, filesystem, and physical hardware.

Berkeley DB also supports high concurrency, allowing thousands of users to operate on the same database files at the same time.

Berkeley DB generally outperforms relational and object-oriented database systems in embedded applications for a couple of reasons. First, because the library runs in the same address space, no inter-process communication is required for database operations. The cost of communicating between processes on a single machine, or among machines on a network, is much higher than the cost of making a function call. Second, because Berkeley DB uses a simple function-call interface for all operations, there is no query language to parse, and no execution plan to produce.